For your time. And we have
one hour and 10 minutes with you. And if you would like to start with some opening
remarks, around three, four minutes, if that's okay with you.
Yeah.
And then we will have questions from members. Thank you.
Absolutely. And thank you very much.
Sorry, Anna, I'm spreading out everywhere here.
But I thought it would be useful to introduce the team that are here
with me to start with, because they will have the detailed information.
So on my left is Anna Clark, and on my right is Nick
Blakely. Behind me, and I'm not going to keep swiveling my head around, but they
can pop their hands up, Danette Olsen, Gina
Williamson, Nicholas Scott, Dean Ford, and
Jessica Taylor. So,
that's the team here with me.
Look, I just want to thank you for the opportunity to talk about the
government's investment in science, innovation and technology,
and how it is going to support New Zealand's economic growth
and our long-term prosperity.
As many of you are aware, the portfolio's going through its biggest
reforms probably in the last
30 years, and that's been guided by the advice from the Prime
Minister's Science, Innovation and Technology Advisory
Council. So, Budget 2026
has continued that momentum, and
we're focused on ensuring that public investment in
science and innovation is very targeted and
focused and aligned with our national
priorities. And so this includes
strengthening our ability to
translate research into real-world
outcomes, so supporting businesses to innovate,
lifting productivity, and addressing some of those key changes that
we have around the changing climate,
and also our health and our resilience.
So key priorities of the reforms is improving the
coherence and the performance of the sector,
and also better aligning funding outcomes
to reduce fragmentation. And if anyone thinks there
isn't fragmentation in the system, let me hold up the
diagram that is just for the start-up commercialization
ecosystem. So, things are complicated, and
we want to ensure that things are less complicated because
we want our wonderful scientists spending their time on
doing their research, not on navigating
complicated systems. So, we have
world-class scientists, and I really want to acknowledge that.
We have wonderful scientists here who have taken us
to world-class standards across a number of areas that
we are very, very good at. So,
I really want to acknowledge our scientists.
I want to acknowledge our innovators.
There's increased an emphasis, and you'll have seen that on the advanced
technologies and how we can ensure advanced
technologies work across all of the pillars.
And also on ensuring
greater commercialization, greater taking
steps to emphasize the move to more practical use of
our research and commercializing it so that we get the
best out of it. And that is good for industries, it's good
for job growth, and it's good for strengthening the
sectors that we are really good at, like our primary sector.
Perhaps you'll have seen that, of course,
there's around 1.9 billion through both direct
SINT appropriations, but also the appropriated
money for the business R&D through vote revenue
for the research and development tech incentives.
And I think it's worth us remembering that
of the spend in research, about two thirds is in the
private sector. And so they're a very important part
of that ecosystem. And I've emphasized that
meeting with industry, meeting with the independent
research organizations, the universities, the cores,
and of course, our public research organizations.
So,
overall, this is about prioritizing areas that we can
get greatest impact. Greatest impact for our
primary sector and our bioeconomy, greatest impact for our
environment, for our health and society,
and for our resilience, and particularly in our
environment. So,
maybe that's enough of me, and I'm happy
for us to take questions, and I'll call in officials if I
look like I'm getting out of depth in the detail.
But thank you again for the opportunity.
Thank you. We'll start with-
Minister. I'm sorry. I
was thinking John Rush, the Prime Minister's- Ah ...
chief science advisor was- Yes ... hoping to step in and- Yes ...
answer any question. Is he online for us?
He's... Oh, yes.
Yes, you are. Oh, yes. Sorry, John, I didn't introduce you as well.
John's coming to us from not somewhere in Ireland with those
rolling hills and bad now But in fact, the US.
So,
the
Prime Minister's chief science advisor, so welcome also, John.
That's good. So we'll start with you, Vin Davidson.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, Minister, for being here this morning and
for those opening comments.
We definitely haven't heard enough of you, so we will have questions to go through.
Good.
And thank you also for the copies of this, the
science investment plan.
I guess the
strongest impression from that, and from your opening remarks, is that
whilst it's a new plan and a significant restructure of the sector-
Mm-hmm
... there is no new funding or no additional funding into that sector.
So,
it's a redistribution-
Yes
... or I think you've called it a reprioritization, and we can see
where those priorities are. But,
I guess that given the potential in the sector
and the
lack of any additional funding in the sector, the first question
really broadly is,
do you believe in science?
Well, I hope so. I've got a science degree, so I'd be feeling a bit of a fraud if I
didn't.
Yes, I do. And look, I accept what you say about no new funding,
and we're in a very constrained financial situation.
But I want to give you the example from the tertiary
sector,
because sometimes it's not just throwing more money in, sometimes it
is making much better use of the money.
So, for example, in the tertiary sector with the
Performance Based Research Fund, which we've now changed
to the Tertiary Research Excellence Fund.
The universities told us that over the six-year period that the
PBRF ran each cycle, they spent over
$40 million a year in the compliance costs of
that. Now, that is time and money that researchers
in the university system were not spending on their
research. And so,
we didn't increase the funding there.
It's still 315 million a year. But what we've
done is take away some of that cost.
So, I think that's really important to ensure that you've got
the most efficient and effective system running
because sometimes just throwing more money into a system isn't going to
fix it if you're overly burdensome with the compliance.
So, I accept that there is no additional money going in.
It is a redistribution. But we are wanting to make it much
clearer, much more simple for our researchers
to be able to use the research money that is there.
Sure. So just to sup on that, you talked in your opening remarks about New
Zealand having world-class scientists, and I agree, we do.
Mm-hmm.
And researchers in that space. Do you think there are more or
less working in New Zealand since you came into government?
Yes. Look, let's go through the details of that, because I've seen
numbers thrown out in the media which I think aren't helpful.
So I want to give you the absolute details of it, because I think
it's really important that we work with that.
So, if I can take you through the trends on the
actuals.
So for BSI in 2024, there were
2,225 staff there.
They went down to 2,102 in '25,
and have gone down slightly again in '26,
down to 2,024. So
that's been the area there's been the most significant
reduction. In earth sciences, they went from
June '24, 1,214, down to
1,082 in June
'25. But in June '26, they're up to
1,209. So they have increased over the last
year. In the public health and forensic science PRO,
they were 567 in June '24, went down in
'25 to 502, and have gone up now to
537 in June '26. So overall,
the difference has been from, in June '24,
4,006 to June '26,
3,770. So a difference of
236 But add on to
that 12 that have gone into the New Zealand
Institute of Advanced Technology, which will obviously be
increasing because it's only standing up now.
So yes, there are around
224 less, but it is certainly not the
700 odd that I've seen thrown about in the media.
Sure. So for a sector that size, 200 and something is still
a significant number. Where do you think those people have gone?
I don't know where they've gone. They may have gone into the private sector, they
may have gone overseas, and that's
not unheard of, that our top scientists
are in demand around the world. But I don't have the details of that.
But our scientists are mobile.
Yeah. There's a difference between our top scientists being in demand around the
world and our top scientists or any of our science community
having to leave New Zealand to find work elsewhere.
Yeah. And look, we will have
scientists that don't see themselves in this picture
that we are showing here. But we are being very
clear about the direction over the next five years of
where the science spend is going to be, and that will
require some changes. But it also gives a
very clear indication for scientists and
for our research organizations where the public investment
is going to occur.
So do you think it-
I just wanted to add, there's obviously the public science system, and then as the
minister said earlier, there's two thirds of R&D that happens in the private
sector, and while it's not this vote, actually funding is
increasing for the research and development tax initiative, and that's because-
Mm
... R&D is increasing in the private sector, and in fact, it's forecast to increase
across the forecast period. So there is increase in R&D happening in the private
sector, which is a real positive story.
And it has occurred for the last 10 years.
There's been significant increase there, which is great because that industry
buy-in, I think, is really important.
Yeah. Just as-
A supplementary from Dr. David Wilson.
Yes.
I think you may have already answered my question then.
The immediate thing that jumped out to me is the increase in the private sector.
Mm.
It's quite significant, isn't it? Do you know why, or do we know why?
Well, I think that
businesses see that it gives them global
market share if they are investing.
And our businesses are,
I think, very open to putting that investment in to
ensure that they stay really competitive.
All right.
And over 10 years, I think it's about 16% a year it's averaged-
Yes
... increasing.
It's significant.
It is. It's very significant. And it
contributes two thirds. So why wouldn't we want to
see that increasing?
And I can just-
Allow me a second-
Supplementary
... just to-
I'll let Nick... You were-
I was just going to add on the
R&D tax incentive in particular.
Yeah.
We had an evaluation of that done. It was tabled in 2025, and that
showed it was working and providing significant bang for buck, as they called it in
the report. So really crowding in some of that private sector-
Yeah
... R&D as well. So we think that that's a real contributing factor, too.
I must be science new because I read this at 5:00 in the morning.
Thank you, team- ... for getting it all here on the tool.
So
I like the four pillars, and I think it's appropriate for New
Zealand. So do you foresee that this will actually attract more
talent? Because we've zeroed in a bit more on what we think our strength is.
Yes, I think it will.
I suppose if we look at some of the success stories, and
there's a range of success stories.
But if you look at
perhaps something like Holter, the
virtual fencing, which many of you will have seen.
That
is something that
New Zealand's been very much a test bed for that, but now they
are
moving into North America, into South America.
And so the more revenue that they gain through that, the more
they will expand their operations here.
They're wonderful things to see, we're in the middle of Auckland,
here's Holter working away with their wonderful
innovations there and their advanced technology.
And then you go out to
our biggest high country station, Gleneary,
biggest privately owned high country station.
Pinkney family, which I visited recently, which I think some of
our other MPs may have been there as well, where they're using
Holter on several hundred of their cattle beast.
They are using technology like Optiweigh,
sadly an Australian company, where
cattle can weigh themselves in the paddock.
And their weight gain or loss each day is sent at 5:00 in the
morning to the device of the manager.
And they're utilizing technology like Bluetooth
enhanced drench guns, which link to the actual
weight of the cattle beast, calibrates the exact amount of drench
that they should get so that they're not over-drenching.
Reduces cost for the farmer,
reduces the risk of drench resistance.
And so
you see that wonderful innovation and
technology occurring in our cities being played
out to increase the productivity of our primary
sector, but then being taken overseas
to bring in export dollars. And that's where I think
the growth of our reputation will
attract overseas investors who see it as a great
test bed, and that we've got great
people here that can advance technologies and science.
All right. A supplementary, Scott Willis.
Yes. Thank you. So, the
Association of Scientists have talked about flat-lining
R&D from the private sector,
and from stats. So are your figures different
to-
Yes
... to what has been given to you?
I think it's probably the timeframe.
Yeah.
I think I'll have to check the notes.
Thanks.
Over the last year, that might be the case.
But if you look at the general trend and the amount of funding that's being spent
on the R&D side.
I think it's been about 0.4, so it's been a smaller increase
over the last year, which is understandable in the current sort
of
uncertain economic times for businesses.
But prior to that, the 10 years prior to that, there'd been
significant growth, and it's forecasted to be significant growth again.
It's just, I think, a confidence situation at the
moment for businesses.
Yes. So quickly, that 5% to 10%
drop in private sector R&D funding, that does seem to
show a real lack of confidence in the-
I don't think it's been a drop. I think it's been a drop in the growth.
I think actually the amount spent has continued
to rise, but it hasn't risen as dramatically as it has
over the past 10 years.
Okay. I think-
But if I've got those figures wrong, Scott, we'll certainly
have a look and get that detail.
All right.
If anyone behind wants to leap in, but I thought it was a
0.4 private sector.
I think Dean does have the other-
Dean, you-
Yeah, that's correct, Minister. So, there's been strong growth and then the
last 12 months has been a flat line,
and then little steps.
Okay. New primary from Vanessa Reddin.
Thank you very much, Minister.
So there's a reasonably substantial investment, I would
say, into the broader science innovation and technology
arena. How do you expect that
that investment will pay off in terms of
economic productivity and boosting?
Yeah. Thank you. And that's exactly
the result that we want to occur. Yes, it is a significant investment,
around $1.9, just under $1.9 billion.
And the need to have that focused is incredibly
important. We are in constrained financial
times, and we want to get the best bang for our buck from
this. And so we want to
ensure that that spending is impactful.
And if people go away with nothing today other than
the word impactful, that is exactly where we
are focusing on ensuring that the
public spend is having an impact on
our economy, and in terms of
where we have our strengths, our primary sector, ensuring that our
productivity increases, ensuring that we are
growing our export income from our private sector.
So impactful in the growth of our economy, but also
impactful in terms of
our societal benefits, our public policy benefits,
and our environment. And so,
we have unashamedly said we must
get impact from that public spend.
And I think the public expect that.
That it is focused, that we are giving clear direction, we
are giving certainty to our researchers, to our
scientists, to our research organizations.
So, you can debate whether you agree with the direction,
but I think that certainty and that direction is really
important.
And so just to follow up on that, how are you expecting to be able to measure that
impact, and what sort of things would you expect?
Yeah. So,
the KPIs are being developed across the
PROs to ensure that there's consistency,
and John may want-- I've lost John off there, but he may want to speak
more about
work that the Prime Minister's Science Innovation and Technology
Advisory Council are doing. So they are doing additional
work on workforce, on infrastructure, but also on
monitoring, because you're absolutely right, if the
public is seeing $1.8, $1.9 billion
spent, they want to see that it is being well monitored.
And so work is being done on ensuring that there is
accountability and good monitoring.
John, do you want to say anything more on that?
Thank you, Minister. Not much more to add other than that is part of our work
program over the next six months at the Prime Minister's Advisory Council.
There's many jurisdictions around the world are wrestling with
that, how do you truly measure impact?
We're keeping in touch with them, and we're looking to develop our own metrics.
Mm-hmm. And the fact that the PROs have got
consistent KPIs, I think, is
also a good part of that.
Rupert Davidson.
Yeah, thank you.
You've talked about Halter.
Mm-hmm.
And we love talking about Halter because it's-
... massively commercially successful, right?
It's a poster child for what our science and innovation sector can deliver.
Mm-hmm.
But it's not the beginning and end of the story because that
story starts a long time ago.
Mm-hmm.
And that's the nature of science and innovation.
So I guess the question is, if we're talking about basic science or
fundamental research-
Mm-hmm
... and the value of that,
one of the criticisms or observations has been that the budget currently
really under-invests and undervalues that aspect of our
science and innovation sector. I'm interested to hear from you
about the five local blue skies or fundamental research
projects you're most excited about.
Oh, look, I think there's a range of them, and I think
impact may
mean different things at different stages of research.
And so
when we talk about impact, we want all the
applications to be considered on the basis of
impact. But you're quite right, at some of the
early stage basic level, it may be that the
impact is quite some distance out.
But as long as a pathway, as long as
it can be articulated how that will lead to
impact, I think that's the key thing.
It's not expected that all research will have that commercial
impact immediately. It's acknowledging
that we want to see it as part of the progression
of that research.
Sure. And that's a great aspiration.
Mm.
But specifically-
And, and look-
... the five projects just off the top of your head-
Well-
... blue sky fundamental research projects that excite you about the future of the
sector.
I don't have them at the top of my head, Reuben, but I acknowledge
exactly what you're saying, and if you look back to
something like Genome New Zealand,
that is taking essentially 30 years of
science research. So,
the impact that they are having now in terms
of the accumulation of that research over
30 years, the application of advanced
technology to it, and the ability to commercialize that,
I think
it acknowledges the very point that you're saying,
that impact will be a different
part of the journey for different
research.
Sure, but your budget and your prioritizations on spending in
this vote currently-
Mm
... really under-invest in that part of the
sector.
Well, I'm not sure that you can say that
yet, Reuben, because the criteria are still
being worked up by Research Funding New Zealand.
And so they are mindful of the fact that
impact will be at different times
for different stages of research.
So, I think that
it is still going to be a key part of it to see
impact at some point in their journey,
but it
may well be at a much longer
trajectory for those that are at that early stage basic research.
I think, Minister, so the Transition Research Fund 2027,
will support investigator-led research across the spectrum.
So blue sky and basic research will still be
funded. What I could do is ask Danette to
perhaps talk about some of the work we're doing around ensuring that that full
spectrum of science continues to be funded.
Sure. Yeah. So the transition fund-
Danette's just come up
... is set to come up.
Yeah, she better come up so that she can be heard. There we are.
Just before Danette, while Danette's coming up.
Yeah, I think across these science reforms, there's a shift in the balance, but
it's not a wholesale throwing out of one.
Mm.
So there is a shift in the balance of where the sector,
so more into advanced technologies.
There's a shift towards more mission led, where there's more
benefit to New Zealand, and there's a shift
in the commercialization
side as well. So there are some shifts in the balance, but it's a shift in the
balance. It's not a wholesale one side to the other.
Yeah. And I think the key characteristic of the new system with the four
pillars is it's outcome focused. So what are the outcomes we're trying to achieve
for New Zealand and a clear sense of priorities, and then what's the appropriate
research to deliver on those, both in the short term and in the long term.
And so the way that the transition fund has been developed is that it's discipline
agnostic,
so it's there to support the appropriate research to deliver those outcomes, and
that often will be transdisciplinary.
And it's also agnostic around whether it's basic through to much more
applied research, so
TRL agnostic as well. The key
characteristic of the funds coming from the Prime Minister's Council
advice and through the SIP is a laser focus on impact, but
that impact can be over many different time frames.
And so in order to achieve the kinds of outcomes that we're envisaging, we'll
need a combination of basic research through to applied and commercialization.
Understanding some of those fundamental processes will support the more applied
research that leads to those outcomes.
I think in some ways it's more liberating because there's not
a constrained number that you would have if you have a single fund like the
Marsden Fund where you say there's a certain amount of money and that's spent on
basic research. In this, you've got across the four pillars, no
ring fencing, and so there's real opportunity for there to be an appropriate
balance
in order to deliver the outcomes New Zealand's looking for.
So just to sup on that.
That's a further disruption to a really disrupted sector through a
big time of structural change that the minister talked about at the beginning.
I guess my question here then is around,
I understand how the Transition Research Fund will work.
But currently we've got Marsden moving away from blue skies.
We've got Endeavor moving only to contract extensions.
And you've got-
talent development fund folding into the Transition Research Fund.
So all this change slows down potentially a whole
lot of projects, could potentially end projects.
How's that
stepping up of that new fund going to-
So the Transition Fund brings together the Endeavor funding and the Marsden
funding-
Mm
... into a new fund. And it's got three mechanisms: talent
development, projects, and programs.
So through the Marsden Fund, there was a Fast-Start
program, and through the Endeavor fund there was a Smart Ideas program, and
that was often accessed by early career researchers.
And so the talent element of the Transition Fund kind of
leans towards the early career development or it is also there to support
researchers who might want to pivot their career to align their research
to the priority areas. And so that's
allowing for that kind of activity to continue under a
different set of criteria and a different name, but essentially it continues
to support that really important part of the system, our early career researchers.
And then the project mechanism is of a similar sort of size,
actually it's slightly larger than the old Marsden Standard grants and the
Smart Ideas projects that we had under Endeavor, and that enables a transition from
talent development through to leading
larger projects. And then you've got research programs, which are
substantively similar to
the Endeavor research programs, which is about large mission-led, excellent,
impactful
programs that are going to deliver multiple impacts and will transfer.
So the Transition Fund enables a scale up through the system in a way
that the former system has not really enabled.
As the minister said, it was quite fragmented.
You get funding in one area, and then your project finishes, and you've got to try
and find funding somewhere else. Through the Transition Fund and the work that
Research Funding New Zealand is doing on future fund design, there's a real
deliberate thought about how do we transition great ideas through the system
from early career researchers or from the development of a first
idea that then shows merit that can then be developed into a larger
program through to impact, and looking at ways that you might then partner with the
private sector or other parts of government in order to deliver outcomes that
we're seeking. So that's kind of the direction of travel that we're trying to get
to. It actually makes the system easier for researchers to navigate and
participate in.
And we've been being very clear that the Marsden and
Endeavor, the same amounts are being pulled together.
There is no reduction.
And there's no
ending of existing contracts.
Correct.
Right. Dr. Williamson, a supplementary?
Yes. Supplementary on this. So, thank you for that explanation
around the shift in
the relative difference between
mission-led and investigator-led.
Previously it was about, or at the moment, it's about 45 for
mission-led-
Mm
... to 55 for investigator-led. So now we're shifting
more or aiming to be more 60% to 40%,
as I understand, roughly-
Mm-hmm
... under the new settings. How does that stack up
internationally? Are we on par with
other international jurisdictions?
Mm. Excellent.
I mean, John might want to talk to us.
John might, yes.
But, I mean, we have been at the end, actually we've been a bit more of an
outlier on the contestable, investigator-led side.
But I think John would be well placed, yeah.
Mm.
Yeah. If I could just touch on the previous question before I answer that one.
I think there's a bit of confusion
in the terms. There's an inference that mission-led doesn't involve basic
research, and I think the Halter example that you used is a very good
example. Halter are on a mission. Their mission
initially was to produce a virtual fence.
It's now a virtual herd management software, and it is probably moving to
a new horizon beyond that as well. But that was the mission right
from the start. They needed basic research to undertake it.
So these are not at conflict, despite the fact
that there is a representation of that in some of the media reporting.
So I think that's important to realize.
We will fund basic research, basic research that is driven
to a need and driven to an outcome.
In terms of whether we're an outlier in the global setting,
the information that we received at the Prime Minister's Advisory Council
said that we were, with so little focused on mission
and so
much of our... Or so a higher proportion of what we invest focused
in investigator-led. We've turned those
around to be closer to 60% mission-led,
40% investigator-led. That is what I see globally.
I spent a chunk of yesterday morning with DARPA in Washington,
which as a classic example of mission-led but basic research
focused,
and I discussed this very topic with Commissioner
Zahareva in Europe last year and
the next version of Horizon Europe, in
her words not mine, will be very much mission-led,
as opposed to what they've currently been, which is very heavily investigator-led.
So I think we are putting together a system that is very consistent with
what we're seeing around the world.
Okay. Thank you.
Dr. David Wilson.
Thank you, John. And actually, I think that
is a really important
point that you've made, John, that mission-led
is basic right through to applied, and so
I think we do get ourselves a wee bit confused with the titles
of it.
Yeah. Thank you.
Sorry.
Supplementary, Dr. David Wilson.
Yeah, just pushing the barrow a little on this line.
One thing that jumped out at me when I had a little read of this this morning was
the Ignition fund-
Mm
... which is under development.
Mm.
And I quite like the wording you've used, high risk, high reward activity-
Mm
... where there's an immediate strategic opportunity that New Zealand needs to
respond to. I really like the framing.
So just wondering if you could make some comment about that, John and/or Minister-
Yeah
... in light of what we've just been talking about.
Yeah. Look, it's to ensure that-
Something really clever doesn't fall through the
gaps and is able to be addressed quickly, but it's at very
early stages of development. John, unless you want to say anything more, but
it's recognizing exactly that we don't
want an opportunity to fall through the gaps.
All right. Reuben Davidson follow-up?
John, did you... Sorry.
New primary.
New. Okay, new primary.
Just on that, that is the reason I visited with DARPA yesterday morning, because
right around the world, the countries that have tried to create one of
these high-risk, potentially high-reward funds have focused in
on the DARPA model, which is a
fascinating, very versatile, and
rapid research fund. So that was, as
the minister said, that was our reason for this, was a quirky
idea that's just, it doesn't suit our
current
more conservative investment model
would be given airplay. In the DARPA situation, somebody pitches
an idea as wild as it could be, and if the director of DARPA likes it,
they get funded to build up that concept.
And if the concept has legs, then they get funded
to do it. So it is exciting. We're just developing the framework
for that right now in a subcommittee of the PMSTAC.
New question from Reuben Davidson.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
One of the things that we've talked about
a fair amount through this conversation so far, through the questions so far,
is around the disruption that restructure creates.
And people are often at the center of that disruption.
So workforce people,
how we retain people at all stages of their careers in the science
sector.
I'm wondering if you can give me some specific mechanisms that you've got in place
to support early career researchers,
given that they are
both
at flight risk, they'll disappear, but also that the
conversations I've had with people who've been in the sector a long time,
their greatest concern is that they cannot look students in the
eye and tell them to undertake this course of study because they don't have
confidence in your plan. So what plans, if
any, have you got in place to give them an assurance
and to
protect the existing workforce, but to make this a viable
career opportunity for our future?
As John said earlier, and I think I commented on it too, part of
PMSTAC's
work program over the next while is around the workforce and
development of the workforce. So that's a critical part of it.
I think also, Reuben, it's really important for us to look at
that whole ecosystem, our
universities, our cores, our
PROs, and also our independent research
organizations. And so,
the Prime Minister's Advisory Council will be spending...
They're well down the track, but we will be spending more time on
ensuring that there are
clear pathways. Just a couple of things if I can say to you that are
concerning me, and I guess it's almost with my other hat on of
tertiary education, but it flows very much into this.
We have got to the stage now where
more than 50% of those undertaking masters in
New Zealand are international students.
So,
international master's students outnumber our domestic.
And in the
PhD and the doctoral studies, that
has been for a number of years now. There are more international
students coming in and coming in on domestic
fees from a
policy that was put in place probably about 2002, I think.
And so
I think, yes, it's wonderful that the council are looking at
that whole workforce development.
But I also want to take a look back even a step
further at what's coming through our universities and how we
have got ourselves into this situation of
having a majority of those students coming through
being international. Now, in some instances, that will be good because they will
be covering gaps where we are not able to encourage our
domestic students into. But
in other instances, it may be that we're spending money, because
remember, the
PhD international students are domestic fees
only. So we may be spending money on areas
that we could use to incentivize our local domestic
students more. So there's a whole range of that work right from the
work that the council are doing to look at the whole thing, but also
work that I'm doing looking at the tertiary sector as well.
And you probably want to talk about some of the-
I can help you-
Yes. Some of the specific fund areas
... minister.
Yes. Yes.
There's a couple of points. One around having a really clear strategy-led system
and clear priorities means that the research
organizations can think about what capabilities are needed going forward, and early
career researchers can see this is the future of science in New Zealand.
This is how I can orientate myself towards that.
Prior to this, we haven't had basic strategies, and so people have had no clear
direction about where they study, what they learn.
Organizations have had to kind of guess about what capabilities they need to build.
So I think this gives a much clearer signal to the community about what
capabilities we need to build. And then we have mechanisms to support that.
So as I talked before at the Transition Fund, we've got the Talent Development
Fund,
particularly focusing on areas that we want to build capability in New Zealand,
giving a very clear signal. We've got the Applied PhD Fund, which is
incredibly successful,
developing
PhDs who can work-
Mm
... within industrial or commercial context,
again, aligned to the priority areas.
We've got the Te Aupito Mana fellowships, which funds a range of different stages
of career to support researchers, again, to develop
aligned to our government's priorities.
The projects component of the Transition Fund is also
designed in a way that early career researchers apply to that fund as well and lead
small projects and small teams. And then the big mission lead programs,
aggregated platforms. We've got SIF platforms that sit within the institutions,
and those PROs use that funding to support early career researchers and
build their workforce, that funding.
And then other missions like, for example, the RNA platform would be a good
example. Within that mission-led platform, there's a range of research funds,
like John made earlier, that goes from basic through to very commercial, but also
built into that opportunities for early career researchers to undertake
postdocs or lead small projects within a larger program and build their research.
And Ruben, just on those applied
PhD,
on that Applied PhD fund, that was work that Dr.
Rishi and I did prior to the last election, and it's incredibly
important given that two-thirds of our research takes place
in industry. It's really important that we have
our students engaged with industry at that time because
they are much more likely to get employment out in the private sector than
they are in the public sector. So we want that pathway to be
obvious to early researchers.
Sure. And-
And just before that, can I just say the officials please speak into the
microphone? That's needed for Hansard.
Yeah. Sorry.
That's all right. Yes, Ruben Davidson, supplementary.
Yeah, just a sup on that because the answers
are
optimistic and speak to a scenario where
it's all going very well. The perspective directly
from, in this case, Professor Nicola Gaston, who
says from the tertiary university sector, "Most of us
in the university sector are just focused on keeping the lights on and
preserving the quality of what we offer to our students." That sounds like a really
different perspective from the one you've articulated.
I'm wondering, Minister, how you respond to that.
Look, I think that was a question that should've been asked in the tertiary
sector scrutiny more than here.
Thank you.
So you have no-
All right. Okay
... response to that?
Scott Willis. Question. Primary.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So Sir David Skegg has said that the main purpose of health
research was not to make money, but to improve the health of the people.
And what are the implications for New Zealanders' health now that the
funding for the Health Research Fund has ended?
It hasn't ended yet. It ends once our legislation goes
through, but of course, health is a fourth
pillar, is one of the pillars. And so it's a very important part of
the research funding ecosystem. It's
incredibly important. Health and
society is certainly a very strong focus for us.
So the fact that the-
And sorry,
once the health research funding,
once the legislation passes, that goes into the
Research Funding New Zealand. So it's not gone.
It's pulled into that centralized research program.
Okay.
Thinking about mātauranga Māori, humanities, and social sciences-
Mm-hmm
... how will that foundational funding be ensured under
this new social science system?
Well, it's certainly a key part of it under the
pillars. And so,
yes, part of the impact is about the
commercialization for
greater productivity and economic growth, but it's also in terms
of
better societal outcomes. And so it's very much part
of the full ecosystem.
And you'll probably see it a bit more when you have a chance to have a read through
here, Scott.
All right. New primary, Ruben Davidson.
Sorry. No, this is sup on this-
Oh, supplementary. Yeah
... on this-
Supplementary. That's fine
... Health Research Council
question.
You've
talked about Research Funding New Zealand being the replacement for the Health
Research Council.
Yes.
Yeah.
Of that new independent board,
how many of those members live outside of New Zealand?
Three.
Ooh, is it three? Okay. Three. Yes.
Okay. And how many of them have
experience in clinical med-
Let me-
... experience in-
Well, so,
yes, as a health... Sorry, the Research Funding New Zealand
Council or board, but there's also
advisory groups within each of those areas too.
So
Brett Cowan is also on the HRC council, so he's
got a health background.
So one?
No. So Peter Hunter is a biomedical technology space, new
medical devices, so he works in the medical space.
So two.
That's two.
I'm trying to
think who else is in there.
But it's also the four pillars as the-
That's right.
Yes.
Just in terms of that's the board membership, and then exactly right.
Around each pillar we have a pillar advisory group.
And so there's one for the health and society pillar.
They're working on the pillar investment plan, and there's about something like
eight or nine members and I think six or seven of those are
health backgrounds, including Ian Town, who's a science
advisor for the Ministry of Health.
Sure. So-
It's a really important point that you bring up that we do have
those. It's not just the council level.
It's not just the board level. There are much more
subject-focused, discipline-focused PEGs,
advisory groups, who will be developing the pillar
investment plans. So that's where that very
specific discipline level advice comes in.
Yeah. Because if we don't
look at our- ... health research and research our own health system.
Who else will?
Absolutely. And absolutely, and that's why you see the pillars in
here, and somebody's got my annotated version
of this. So they-
I almost got it, but when you've got it.
Hopefully Matt.
Ruben's got it.
So then, I guess a further sup on that then is that,
the Science System Advisory Group envisaged that this would
be achieved by further investment.
But it's not being achieved by further investment.
It's being put inside the existing envelope of funding.
So,
this goes against their recommendation.
Look, I think what we're doing is first getting the system set up.
There is a little more funding in the system this year because some of the
transition funding has been pulled through from last year.
It's important that we get the system set up right, working right.
And certainly,
we would hope that in the future we'll be set up then to be able
to apply for more funding, to seek greater funding
when the economic situation is such that we can.
Do you think hope is a good strategy for health research?
I think getting the economy straight is a good strategy for being able
to invest a lot more money in a lot more really important things
right across our whole country.
So the health of the economy over the health of people?
The health-
Okay. So, all right
... of our economy enables the greater health of our people.
We can't have
an economy failing and still think that we can keep investing to the
level that we would like.
So we can't have both. All right. A new primary, Dr. Vanessa Bennie.
Madame Chair. And, so you mentioned earlier, I think, a
little bit about the research and development, and
tax credit.
Can you just expand on that a bit more, exactly what it is, and
exactly what it's doing, and what we
expect to come from it in the future?
Yeah. So, look, it's worked really well in terms of, I think, the
last 10 years. That's why we've seen the
significant growth. Someone's going to quickly find it for me in here
because I was looking at it last night-
Sorry. Yeah
... and thinking what good growth we were seeing from that.
It enables
industry to have confidence that they can
invest in R&D, and that they can have that recognized as
incentive. And so,
I want the exact growth, and that's why I want to stop talking to
be able to find it quickly.
Here it is here. Right here. Right here. Okay.
And we put some changes in this year in the budget.
Thank you, Dean. You've stepped up to the plate.
So we introduced the
in-year payments so that businesses can get those tax credits
sooner, and that enabled that cashflow to
enable them to keep ongoing research activities happening.
We've also
ensured that
a number of things around at the university, research
commercialization, founding and startup support
program, and the health tech activator.
So, working together, we can see that
that R&D in industry, which... Sorry, here
I have got it, Scott. Sorry.
The
R&D expenditure out in business was 4.1 billion.
So it was up .4%, as I'd said earlier.
Right.
And has had an unbroken steady increase
averaging approximately 16% per year over the last
10 years.
Great.
And I think just adding to that,
we hear a lot about how the public service and the use of AI.
What MBIE has done is worked with Inland Revenue to develop a guide for
businesses to make it easier for them to apply for the RDTI by
using AI. So, as I was thinking about how we use it, we're
explaining to businesses actually how it can be easier for them to apply for this
funding and how they can use AI to do that.
A supplement?
Supplementary.
Just to further a little bit more on that.
Is it an aim of this government to
encourage more investment from the private sector into research?
Absolutely, and as we've said, two-thirds is
in the private sector. And particularly where we've got
mature sectors like our primary industries,
it's really important that they do have skin in the game, even more skin in the
game. So Dean, you might want to say more about it, or have we covered
most of that?
We covered most of it, but maybe the thing I'd add is,
last year was the five-year anniversary of the scheme.
And so-
Sure
... when it was originally put together, there was a commitment to doing
one of those really robust micro data
economic studies to see how this thing performed.
And the results came back, and
there were tweaks that were suggested for improvement, and a
lot of those have been picked up this year.
But the overall number was that for every dollar of public
investment, it generated another $1.40 of
private sector research development activity.
And comparing that across the OECD, New Zealand matched it.
And I'm sure this committee has seen many studies that compare New Zealand to the
OECD average, and we tend to be a bit behind.
So this is something that across the spectrum is one of the schemes that we
think are really working and is at a world-class standard.
There's obviously things you can do to make it better, and some of the improvements
Anna's talking about, but this is something we're really happy with.
Sorry, and we didn't clarify that it's a 15% tax
credit. So thank you.
All right. Cuba Davidson.
So one of the things they found, I think, which is interesting, Dean, was
that-
Compared to Australia, while perhaps our percentage of tax credit
wasn't as high as Australia, the
eligible expenditure in New Zealand is much broader-
Right
... than in Australia. So we allow a greater range of the
expenditure to be counted in that tax credit.
Thank you. Yep, Robyn.
I'm wanting to ask some questions really around Callaghan now. Mm-hmm.
What
I've heard.
The word
cluster, I won't finish it, comes to mind.
But really the word chaos, appropriately, at the moment,
in the fact that it was signaled
for closure 17 months in. They're still
waiting for clarity from government- Mm-hmm ... around what that looks like. Yep.
You've got 176 staff still on site with
no real clarity from you as the minister or from MD
around what that
future for Callaghan, or the fact that there isn't a future for Callaghan, looks
like for those 176 people.
If you want to talk about economic
growth and economic benefit for New Zealand, I would suggest that
those 176 people have enormous potential to contribute to that. Mm.
But 17 months in, you're the third minister in this term of government, there's
still no clarity there for Callaghan.
What's going on?
Yes. And look, I want to acknowledge, I think it's 150 staff.
I clarified that yesterday.
So that's a significant number of staff, and it's a
significant amount of time for them to be going through this uncertainty, and I
absolutely acknowledge that. And I
thank the staff for their professionalism and the way in which they've continued
their work during this period of uncertainty.
It is requiring that legislation to go through to
completely disestablish
Callaghan, and this is a busy government with a full
legislative program, and so it hasn't gone through
yet. And I acknowledge that has caused that
uncertainty. What we are doing though is
continuing on the work that we can do
before the legislation goes through.
So a number have shifted across to
PROs now, and there is still more work that we can do in
that space to give that certainty, shift them into the relevant
PROs. And I am also taking
a further look at the
Gracefield Innovation Quarter as to what can
be done there. So part of it is my fault of saying I want
to take another look at this as a new minister.
I want to see what the possibilities are out at that site,
because as you're aware, there are some incredibly
important
buildings and equipment there, the measurements
building and equipment particularly.
So I think it's really important that we
take enough time to ensure that
those that can be sold, that can be moved into
PROs, that is done, and then that we actually look
at that site, because it's an important site for Wellington and the
Hutt, and so I want to look at what can be done there.
So I absolutely acknowledge what you're saying about those
150 staff. Hopefully, we will be able to give some
certainty in a relatively short space of time in terms
of another move into a PRO,
and then working through that legislation as we
are able to. But I fully acknowledge it's been a
significant period of time for those staff, where they have
been waiting to see that. They know the certainty of
Callaghan being disestablished, but they are waiting for the
certainty of being shifted into their PROs where the legislation
requires that.
So how much longer do you expect them to wait?
Well, look, it is to do with the legislative
change that we need to get, and so it's a priority for me.
It's an absolute priority for me. And I just am
having discussions with the leader of the house with that being a
priority for me, so I can't get ahead of her
decisions. But, one, I can tell you I'm very mindful of
it. I am trying to move what I can without legislation,
and two, I am
expressing how much of a priority it is to me to get that
through.
Sure. And so I had the number 176, you
had the number 150. They're different numbers.
The difference is that yours is lower than mine.
Now, this is part of the ongoing story we're seeing in this
sector, is that rapid change, not enough plan,
no lift in funding, and then things slowing down at central government
level. You're unable to move the legislation through. People are disappearing.
Where have those 26 people gone?
Well, that 150 was a figure that I got from the chief
executive and the chair, so I'm presuming it's
correct. I don't know where you got your 176 figure
from.
Sure. But do you accept that with the inaction
on your part currently to move these people into
certainty of employment, there is a very real risk that many
of them will just leave the country or leave the sector?
Look, I absolutely accept that uncertainty
is difficult. It causes anxiety for staff, and
I am very mindful of it. That is why it's a priority for
me. That is why I am working very closely
to shift what I can shift prior to legislative
change. But w- Uncertainty for anyone is difficult.
Uncertainty for staff around their employment causes
anxiety and stress. I absolutely accept that.
And you accept that it makes people go overseas and find work elsewhere?
Well, I don't know whether that's what it does, but I know it makes their life
difficult, and I acknowledge that.
I think that's exhausted. Ask Scott Willis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. What are the implications for New Zealand's relationship
with our international partners
science collaboration when we've cut the Catalyst Fund?
Is that having an impact on some of our relationships?
No, not that I am aware, but have I got someone who wants to talk about
that?
So Catalyst Fund hasn't been cut.
Been cut. Yeah. That's what-
Yes, I-
I've got a new one
... I think we need to always clarify when we say cutting, do
not cut.
In terms of the Catalyst Fund, there's no intention, there's no plan to cut
funding. The funding shifts between years to do with, when contracts are
entered into and the phasing of funding.
So it's just an artifact of money moving between financial years.
So there's been no budget decision to reduce the amount of funding-
And so the, where is the funding moving to?
So, it's the amount that's been appropriated for some times has
not changed. What happens is that we enter into contracts.
Contracts are multi-year. They can go through changes.
We can vary contracts, or we are unable to run a joint round
with another country in the year that we think we're going to run it, and then we
move the money forward or we bring money back.
So it's just the
vote is very dynamic, and so it's just that money moving around between
financial years. But the important point is the government has not reduced the
amount of money in any in the last couple of budgets.
And Denise, I wonder if it's worth talking about the Horizons-
Yes. Yes. That's right. So we, or New Zealand-- So on the question around
international collaboration,
we have the Horizon Europe, which is our significant investment in international
collaboration. And New Zealand's doing exceptionally well, in
that fund. We're managing to
successfully partner with a number of international research
organizations and access that EU funding, bring that back to New Zealand.
We've actually exceeded our expectations, and we've
been more successful than we anticipated.
And more successful than Australia.
Yes. Australia's only just entered into the association.
The other-- and so that obviously helps facilitate international
collaboration. The catalyst facilitate collaboration.
But international collaboration is also a really important part of all of our
funds. And so when we think about, again, the transition fund and our future funds
that RFNZ will be administering, they'll be looking to see that those
proposals that they end up funding have the appropriate international collaboration
built into them to ensure that we are partnering with the best globally, not just
the best within New Zealand.
Thank you.
All right.
And you, Primary Ruben Davidson.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I guess the thing that I just wanted to take the opportunity here was to put the
voice of some of our sector into my final question for you today.
Okay.
The New Zealand Association of Scientists says that the $40 million
increase for science and innovation tracked below inflation pressures, so
represents a neat decrease in the sector.
The Kyle Higham from Motu Economic and Public Policy
says that your budget asks scientists to do more with
less and then wondered why scientists leave.
And Nicola Gaston from the MacDiarmid Institute says
that you've ignored advice from the Science System Advisory Group to increase
funding in the sector's
reforms and that it is instead a dog's breakfast in
need of euthanasia.
At the beginning of the session this morning, I asked you if you believed in
science. Do you remember what your answer was?
Absolutely, I believe in science.
It wasn't what your answer was. You said, "I hope so."
So let the minister now respond to all those points that you've
made.
I haven't finished my question.
Because she believes-
All right.
In science. Absolutely.
So, yeah. So you started asking a question, and you stopped there.
So your question finished there.
Sure.
So let minister expand that.
I'll have a sup then, but-
Yeah.
Thank you. Look, I absolutely believe in science.
I think science is going to be at the heart of our economic growth
and our economic recovery, as well as our better outcomes
for the environment, better outcomes for society, and for the
health of our population. So I absolutely
believe in science. It was an odd question for you to ask, I'd have to
say. Look, there are a range of opinions.
There of course there are a range of opinions.
There are a number of people who may not like the direction that we have
set, but we have set a very clear direction.
The economic situation is such that we are not able to put money into a
lot of areas that we would love to put more money into.
We have been left with a financial situation where we are
paying $9 billion a year in interest
because of debt. And so we would love to have that
money back, to put more money into science, to put more money into health, to put
more money into our schools and our hospitals. We'd love to.
We'd love for that previous government not to have run up that level of debt.
But that is the reality that we're dealing with, $9 billion
a year being spent on interest. We want to get our
science, innovation, and technology system into a state
where when we get to a situation where we can put more funding in,
that we get the best impact from that funding.
So my final question to you then is at the beginning when I asked you that
question, whether you believed in science, you said you hope so.
But my question in hearing your answer now around levels of debt and
priority of investment into the science sector, and this vote,
$1.9 billion, but you're happy to invest $3
billion into landlords. So do you prioritize-
When you come to the question you're making-
Over the science sector?
Ruben.
I suggest you ask that question.
This is not a speech time. Can you-
If it is appropriate
... do you have a question here?
Yes. I said, do you think it's appropriate to prioritize landlords over
the science innovation sector?
That's not my responsibility.
Yeah, it's not minister's. Okay. All right.
So looks like-
And I'm sorry that you interpreted my question at the start when I
said I hope. It was just such an unusual question
that of course I am invested in and
supportive of the science, innovation, and technology sector
Thank you, Minister. It looks like we've a round of questions here
on the select committee, but there might-- Oh, there is one more question. Yeah.
Dr David Wilson.
Thank you. This is a question coming from
a regional perspective-
Mm
... and which you'll fully understand.
And the experience that I had in Northland was that the connection between what
we're trying to develop from a research point of view or an innovation point of
view in the region, found it very difficult to navigate the national
innovation system.
Mm.
Really hard.
And you'll appreciate that the research needs of Tairāwhiti are probably
different from the research needs of Southland or Northland.
So really, what this is about is in this new system, this new
framework, how can we ensure that we're actually making that connection
with those on the ground with the options that we have here?
Mm.
Look, I think
the complexity of it has been an absolute issue, and
it's a little bit like the tertiary system, where
every minister that comes along has a bright idea and pops a new program in,
and never takes one out or consolidates up.
And so you get this plethora of
programs and initiatives that you can apply
through. And me, in amongst this for two months, that a
bit of that has happened here too. And so I think the
consolidation
into Research Funding New Zealand is really important.
The simplification of the system is really important
because, I think I said it early on, we want
our scientists, we want our researchers to be spending
their time where they work best. We don't
want them spending time trying to navigate their way through
a system that is so convoluted and so complex.
So this has simplified things. The centralized
funding entity, Research Funding New Zealand, will
simplify things. But we've done it in a measured way
over a longer timeframe, so not to cause
disruption
more than is necessary. And look,
it
is a system that is very finely balanced, and so we need
to take our time to ensure that contracts aren't disrupted,
that as little disruption as possible can occur, but
at the same time, moving towards this much more simplified system.
We want our researchers and our scientists doing what they do best.
Thank you, Minister, and thank you to your team as well.
You might get some follow-up written questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
The members now we've